Definition of "Standard Identifier Format" (#3171)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: content/appendices.md

the [room versions specification](/#room-versions) for more
information.

### Standard Identifier Format

> Throughout the specification some identifiers will mention they use the
> "Standard Identifier Format", which is a common definition for how
> identifiers are to be represented. Identifiers which are not explicitly
> listed in this specification or do not use the Standard Identifier Format
> have undefined grammar.
> 
> The requirements of identifiers using this format are:

Reviewer: I would cut to the chase a bit here.

```suggestion
Some values in the Matrix specification are defined to follow the
*common namespaced identifier grammar*. This is defined as follows:
```

Author: it doesn't feel right to cut out a lot of the detail, but it can be improved, sure.

>  * An identifier may not be less than one character or more than 255 characters
>    in length.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * An identifier must be at least one character and at most 255 characters
   in length.
```

I think it is more clear without the negatives.

 * Identifiers must start with one of the characters `[a-z]`, and be entirely

>    composed of the characters `[a-z]`, `[0-9]`, `-`, `_` and `.`.

Reviewer 2: Do we want to allow `[-_.]` to end an identifier? That seems unexpected and can cause confusion (especially `.` as it may be interpreted as the end of a sentence).

Author: This would be a discussion topic on the MSC or for a future MSC. I personally don't have a preference.

Reviewer: the MSC has landed, so this ship has sailed for now. If you want to change it, that'll need a new MSC, imho.

>  * Identifiers starting with the characters `m.` are reserved.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * Identifiers starting with the characters `m.` are reserved for use by the official Matrix specification.
```

Author: I left this bit out as it's kinda redundant: the spec is speaking as itself already, so it doesn't need to reserve it explicitly.

Reviewer: I'm unconvinced. "reserved" alone sounds like we have no intention of using it, which is not correct.

 * Identifiers which are not described in the specification should follow the
   Java Package Naming Convention to namespace their identifier. This is typically
   a reverse DNS format, such as `com.example.identifier`.

> This identifier format is intended for solely non-user-visible identifiers.

Reviewer: I'd like to see a bit more about how/when it is used. In particular, it's for non-user-visible identifiers where it is useful for different implementations to agree on the meaning of a particular identifier.

Author: this seems to depend on the interpretation of the MSC's use of "future identifiers": if it affects everything, then I'm not sure we need the detail.

Reviewer: You may be right. I think it'll be helpful to revisit this once the references to it have landed in the spec.

{{% boxes/note %}}
Identifiers which are accepted into the specification through the proposal process
are assumed to use this Standard Identifier Format unless explicitly mentioned

> otherwise in the proposal.

Reviewer: are they? it's not really appropriate for all identifiers.

Author: I might be misunderstanding the MSC here, but it really sounded like it was the case. The MSC is expected to declare differently if it doesn't want this, aiui.

Reviewer 3: The MSC says that the grammar is intended "entirely by internal identifiers, and not for user-visible strings", which is supported by the line about non-user-visible identifiers above. Perhaps just prepend "Non-user-visible" here as well?

Reviewer: The MSC says:

> We define a "common namespaced identifier grammar". This can then be referenced by other parts of the grammar, in much the same way as Unpadded Base64 is defined today.

It was very much my intention that the grammar would be referenced where it was relevant. I don't see anywhere in the MSC that says that IDs would be assumed to use the grammar until proven otherwise. That seems to be a cognitive leap that I didn't make, and I don't feel comfortable making now.

the [room versions specification](/rooms) for more
information.

> ### Common Namespaced Identifier Grammar

Author: We use sentence case titles in new sections:
```suggestion
### Common namespaced identifier grammar
```

Reviewer: this is capitalised by dint of its content, rather than because it's a section header: it's a proper noun which is capitalised elsewhere (eg https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3171/files#diff-cb81c0bb44decf61a71dff15d94e6559aff6f3d8c80f5d21e585cb6106c89297R73).

The specification defines some identifiers to use the *Common Namespaced
Identifier Grammar*. This is a common grammar intended for non-user-visible
identifiers, with a defined mechanism for implementations to create new
identifiers.

The grammar is defined as follows:

 * An identifier must be at least one character and at most 255 characters
   in length.
 * Identifiers must start with one of the characters `[a-z]`, and be entirely
   composed of the characters `[a-z]`, `[0-9]`, `-`, `_` and `.`.
 * Identifiers starting with the characters `m.` are reserved for use by the

>    official Matrix spefification.

Author: ```suggestion
   official Matrix specification.
```
